## Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember
your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their
services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can [change your cookie
settings](/help/cookies) at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can [change your cookie
settings](/help/cookies) at any time.

Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies [View
cookies](/help/cookies)

Hide this message

Skip to main content

[ GOV.UK  ](https://www.gov.uk)

##  Navigation menu

[ Menu ](/browse) Menu

Search GOV.UK  ×  [ Search GOV.UK  ](/search)

###  Services and information

  * [Benefits](https://www.gov.uk/browse/benefits)
  * [Births, death, marriages and care](https://www.gov.uk/browse/births-deaths-marriages)
  * [Business and self-employed](https://www.gov.uk/browse/business)
  * [Childcare and parenting](https://www.gov.uk/browse/childcare-parenting)
  * [Citizenship and living in the UK](https://www.gov.uk/browse/citizenship)
  * [Crime, justice and the law](https://www.gov.uk/browse/justice)
  * [Disabled people](https://www.gov.uk/browse/disabilities)
  * [Driving and transport](https://www.gov.uk/browse/driving)
  * [Education and learning](https://www.gov.uk/browse/education)
  * [Employing people](https://www.gov.uk/browse/employing-people)
  * [Environment and countryside](https://www.gov.uk/browse/environment-countryside)
  * [Housing and local services](https://www.gov.uk/browse/housing-local-services)
  * [Money and tax](https://www.gov.uk/browse/tax)
  * [Passports, travel and living abroad](https://www.gov.uk/browse/abroad)
  * [Visas and immigration](https://www.gov.uk/browse/visas-immigration)
  * [Working, jobs and pensions](https://www.gov.uk/browse/working)

###  Government activity

  * [Departments](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations)

Departments, agencies and public bodies

  * [News](https://www.gov.uk/search/news-and-communications)

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

  * [Guidance and regulation](https://www.gov.uk/search/guidance-and-regulation)

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

  * [Research and statistics](https://www.gov.uk/search/research-and-statistics)

Reports, analysis and official statistics

  * [Policy papers and consultations](https://www.gov.uk/search/policy-papers-and-consultations)

Consultations and strategy

  * [Transparency](https://www.gov.uk/search/transparency-and-freedom-of-information-releases)

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

###  Search

Search GOV.UK

Search

  1. [Home](/)

#  Ofqual Handbook: General Conditions of Recognition

From:

     [Ofqual](/government/organisations/ofqual)
Published

    12 October 2017
Updated:

     21 September 2023 - [See all updates](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/updates)

Search this manual

Search

  1. [Contents](/guidance/ofqual-handbook)

#  Using the Ofqual Handbook

How to use this handbook

## Content and application of the handbook

The handbook includes the following rules and guidance, which apply to all
awarding organisations and all qualifications we regulate:

  * our General Conditions of Recognition, which we set and publish using our powers under [section 134 of the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009](http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2009/22/section/134)
  * our guidance to the General Conditions of Recognition, which is designed to help awarding organisations understand how to comply with our rules. Awarding organisations must have regard to this guidance under [section 153 of the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009](http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2009/22/section/153)
  * all our other general rules and guidance for regulated qualifications, which were previously published in the following separate documents: 
    * ‘Additional Certificate Requirements’
    * ‘Logo Requirements’
    * ‘Qualification and Component Levels’
    * ‘Total Qualification Time Criteria’
    * ‘Criteria for determining whether a qualification is relevant for the purposes of the Education and Skills Act 2008’

### Which qualifications do we regulate?

The qualifications Ofqual regulates are set out in the [Apprenticeships,
Skills, Children and Learning Act
2009](http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2009/22/contents).

The way the law works means that, even when we regulate an organisation, we do
not necessarily regulate all the qualifications it offers. Awarding
organisations can choose to ask us to regulate only some of their
qualifications. They might, for example, only ask us to regulate
qualifications of a particular level or type, or in a particular subject area.
We use the term ‘scope of recognition’ to describe all the qualifications an
organisation has asked us to regulate.

We regulate qualifications which:

  1. are within an awarding organisation’s scope of recognition, and
  2. have, or may be reasonably expected to have, persons seeking to obtain the qualification who are, or may reasonably be expected to be, assessed wholly or mainly in England.

Examples of qualifications we do not regulate include qualifications which
are:

  * outside an awarding organisation’s scope of recognition (for example, because they are a different level or type, or in a different subject area)
  * taken only by students outside England

## Structure and features of the handbook

The handbook is divided into sections, which correspond to the different
sections of our General Conditions of Recognition. Within each section, you
will find the relevant General Conditions, as well as:

  * any associated supporting requirements, and
  * any guidance we have published to help awarding organisations comply with those rules.

### Searching within the handbook

The search box at the top of each page allows you to search within the whole
handbook. results here will show you which sections of the handbook a search
term appears in. You can also extend search results to the whole of GOV.uk.

To search within a handbook section, first click ‘Open all’ to expand all
subsections:

![Open all
subsections](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/59bf90e640f0b60d8157050f/open-
all.png)

Then, use the search function built into your browser.

### Navigation

The navigation menu below the search box allows you to return to the front
page of the handbook.

![Navigation
controls](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/59bf93eee5274a3fbd4a6ab9/breadcrumbs.png)

You can also use normal navigation controls within your browser

### Defined terms

Throughout the handbook, we use capital letters to identify defined terms,
which have the meaning given in General Condition J1. If you hover over a
defined term, the definition will appear in a tooltip.

## Printing and downloading the handbook

You can print and save offline copies of individual handbook sections. It is
not currently possible to print or save the entire handbook - this is a
limitation of the GOV.uk platform.

To print a handbook section, navigate to it, and print it directly from your
web browser. This will print the entire section. You don’t need to expand
subsections first; this is done automatically when you print a section.

You can also use the ‘Print to PDF’ function built into most operating systems
to save local copies of individual handbook sections as PDF files.

Print this page

## Is this page useful?

  * [ Maybe ](/contact/govuk)
  * Yes this page is useful
  * No this page is not useful

Thank you for your feedback

Report a problem with this page

### Help us improve GOV.UK

Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance
number or credit card details.

This field is for robots only. Please leave blank

What were you doing?

What went wrong?

Send Cancel

### Help us improve GOV.UK

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
We’ll send you a link to a feedback form. It will take only 2 minutes to fill
in. Don’t worry we won’t send you spam or share your email address with
anyone.

Email address

Send me the survey Cancel

## Services and information

  * [Benefits](https://www.gov.uk/browse/benefits)
  * [Births, death, marriages and care](https://www.gov.uk/browse/births-deaths-marriages)
  * [Business and self-employed](https://www.gov.uk/browse/business)
  * [Childcare and parenting](https://www.gov.uk/browse/childcare-parenting)
  * [Citizenship and living in the UK](https://www.gov.uk/browse/citizenship)
  * [Crime, justice and the law](https://www.gov.uk/browse/justice)
  * [Disabled people](https://www.gov.uk/browse/disabilities)
  * [Driving and transport](https://www.gov.uk/browse/driving)
  * [Education and learning](https://www.gov.uk/browse/education)
  * [Employing people](https://www.gov.uk/browse/employing-people)
  * [Environment and countryside](https://www.gov.uk/browse/environment-countryside)
  * [Housing and local services](https://www.gov.uk/browse/housing-local-services)
  * [Money and tax](https://www.gov.uk/browse/tax)
  * [Passports, travel and living abroad](https://www.gov.uk/browse/abroad)
  * [Visas and immigration](https://www.gov.uk/browse/visas-immigration)
  * [Working, jobs and pensions](https://www.gov.uk/browse/working)

## Government activity

  * [Departments](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations)
  * [News](https://www.gov.uk/search/news-and-communications)
  * [Guidance and regulation](https://www.gov.uk/search/guidance-and-regulation)
  * [Research and statistics](https://www.gov.uk/search/research-and-statistics)
  * [Policy papers and consultations](https://www.gov.uk/search/policy-papers-and-consultations)
  * [Transparency](https://www.gov.uk/search/transparency-and-freedom-of-information-releases)
  * [How government works](https://www.gov.uk/government/how-government-works)
  * [Get involved](https://www.gov.uk/government/get-involved)

* * *

## Support links

  * [Help](https://www.gov.uk/help)
  * [Privacy](https://www.gov.uk/help/privacy-notice)
  * [Cookies](https://www.gov.uk/help/cookies)
  * [Accessibility statement](https://www.gov.uk/help/accessibility-statement)
  * [Contact](https://www.gov.uk/contact)
  * [Terms and conditions](https://www.gov.uk/help/terms-conditions)
  * [Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg](https://www.gov.uk/cymraeg)
  * [Government Digital Service](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/government-digital-service)

All content is available under the [Open Government Licence
v3.0](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3/), except where otherwise stated

[© Crown copyright](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-
management/re-using-public-sector-information/uk-government-licensing-
framework/crown-copyright/)

