## Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember
your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their
services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can [change your cookie
settings](/help/cookies) at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can [change your cookie
settings](/help/cookies) at any time.

Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies [View
cookies](/help/cookies)

Hide this message

Skip to main content

[ GOV.UK  ](https://www.gov.uk)

##  Navigation menu

[ Menu ](/browse) Menu

Search GOV.UK  ×  [ Search GOV.UK  ](/search)

###  Services and information

  * [Benefits](https://www.gov.uk/browse/benefits)
  * [Births, death, marriages and care](https://www.gov.uk/browse/births-deaths-marriages)
  * [Business and self-employed](https://www.gov.uk/browse/business)
  * [Childcare and parenting](https://www.gov.uk/browse/childcare-parenting)
  * [Citizenship and living in the UK](https://www.gov.uk/browse/citizenship)
  * [Crime, justice and the law](https://www.gov.uk/browse/justice)
  * [Disabled people](https://www.gov.uk/browse/disabilities)
  * [Driving and transport](https://www.gov.uk/browse/driving)
  * [Education and learning](https://www.gov.uk/browse/education)
  * [Employing people](https://www.gov.uk/browse/employing-people)
  * [Environment and countryside](https://www.gov.uk/browse/environment-countryside)
  * [Housing and local services](https://www.gov.uk/browse/housing-local-services)
  * [Money and tax](https://www.gov.uk/browse/tax)
  * [Passports, travel and living abroad](https://www.gov.uk/browse/abroad)
  * [Visas and immigration](https://www.gov.uk/browse/visas-immigration)
  * [Working, jobs and pensions](https://www.gov.uk/browse/working)

###  Government activity

  * [Departments](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations)

Departments, agencies and public bodies

  * [News](https://www.gov.uk/search/news-and-communications)

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

  * [Guidance and regulation](https://www.gov.uk/search/guidance-and-regulation)

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

  * [Research and statistics](https://www.gov.uk/search/research-and-statistics)

Reports, analysis and official statistics

  * [Policy papers and consultations](https://www.gov.uk/search/policy-papers-and-consultations)

Consultations and strategy

  * [Transparency](https://www.gov.uk/search/transparency-and-freedom-of-information-releases)

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

###  Search

Search GOV.UK

Search

  1. [Home](/)

#  Ofqual Handbook: General Conditions of Recognition

From:

     [Ofqual](/government/organisations/ofqual)
Published

    12 October 2017
Updated:

     21 September 2023 - [See all updates](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/updates)

Search this manual

Search

  1. Contents 

Rules and guidance for all awarding organisations and all regulated
qualifications

This document sets out Ofqual’s General Conditions of Recognition (and
associated requirements) - the rules we have set for all the qualifications
and organisations we regulate. It also includes our guidance on how to comply
with these rules.

All regulated awarding organisations have a legal obligation to:

  * comply with these rules on an ongoing basis
  * have regard to this guidance

  * [Using the Ofqual Handbook](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/using-the-ofqual-handbook)

How to use this handbook

  * [Section A - Governance](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-a-governance)

Rules about governance of awarding organisations, including management of
conflicts of interest, risks, incidents and malpractice

  * [Section B - The awarding organisation and Ofqual](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-b-the-awarding-organisation-and-ofqual)

Rules about the relationship between awarding organisations and Ofqual,
including in relation to Responsible Officers, reporting of information and
the use of Ofqual's logo

  * [Section C - Third parties](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-c-third-parties)

Rules about arrangements with third parties, including Centres and publishers

  * [Section D - General requirements for regulated qualifications](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-d-general-requirements-for-regulated-qualifications)

General rules, including about qualification fitness for purpose and
accessibility, and about reviewing approach, enquiries and complaints,
withdrawing qualifications and information for teachers.

  * [Section E - Design and development of qualifications](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-e-design-and-development-of-qualifications)

Rules about qualification design and development, including about
qualification titling, qualification specifications, credit, and qualification
size and level.

  * [Section F - Providing qualifications to purchasers](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-f-providing-qualifications-to-purchasers)

Rules about providing information on qualification fees and features,
packaging qualifications with other products or services, and invoicing.

  * [Section G - Setting and delivering the assessment](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-g-setting-and-delivering-the-assessment)

Rules about setting and delivering assessments, including about the language
of assessments, maintaining confidentiality of assessments, reasonable
adjustments and special consideration

  * [Section H - From marking to issuing results](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-h-from-marking-to-issuing-results)

Rules about marking, Centre Assessments Standards Scrutiny (including
Moderation), setting specified levels of attainment and results

  * [Section I - Appeals and certificates](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-i-appeals-and-certificates)

Rules about appeals, complaints and the content, design and issuing of
certificates

  * [Section J - Interpretation and definitions](/guidance/ofqual-handbook/section-j-interpretation-and-definitions)

How to interpret our rules, including defined terms

Print this page

## Is this page useful?

  * [ Maybe ](/contact/govuk)
  * Yes this page is useful
  * No this page is not useful

Thank you for your feedback

Report a problem with this page

### Help us improve GOV.UK

Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance
number or credit card details.

This field is for robots only. Please leave blank

What were you doing?

What went wrong?

Send Cancel

### Help us improve GOV.UK

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
We’ll send you a link to a feedback form. It will take only 2 minutes to fill
in. Don’t worry we won’t send you spam or share your email address with
anyone.

Email address

Send me the survey Cancel

## Services and information

  * [Benefits](https://www.gov.uk/browse/benefits)
  * [Births, death, marriages and care](https://www.gov.uk/browse/births-deaths-marriages)
  * [Business and self-employed](https://www.gov.uk/browse/business)
  * [Childcare and parenting](https://www.gov.uk/browse/childcare-parenting)
  * [Citizenship and living in the UK](https://www.gov.uk/browse/citizenship)
  * [Crime, justice and the law](https://www.gov.uk/browse/justice)
  * [Disabled people](https://www.gov.uk/browse/disabilities)
  * [Driving and transport](https://www.gov.uk/browse/driving)
  * [Education and learning](https://www.gov.uk/browse/education)
  * [Employing people](https://www.gov.uk/browse/employing-people)
  * [Environment and countryside](https://www.gov.uk/browse/environment-countryside)
  * [Housing and local services](https://www.gov.uk/browse/housing-local-services)
  * [Money and tax](https://www.gov.uk/browse/tax)
  * [Passports, travel and living abroad](https://www.gov.uk/browse/abroad)
  * [Visas and immigration](https://www.gov.uk/browse/visas-immigration)
  * [Working, jobs and pensions](https://www.gov.uk/browse/working)

## Government activity

  * [Departments](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations)
  * [News](https://www.gov.uk/search/news-and-communications)
  * [Guidance and regulation](https://www.gov.uk/search/guidance-and-regulation)
  * [Research and statistics](https://www.gov.uk/search/research-and-statistics)
  * [Policy papers and consultations](https://www.gov.uk/search/policy-papers-and-consultations)
  * [Transparency](https://www.gov.uk/search/transparency-and-freedom-of-information-releases)
  * [How government works](https://www.gov.uk/government/how-government-works)
  * [Get involved](https://www.gov.uk/government/get-involved)

* * *

## Support links

  * [Help](https://www.gov.uk/help)
  * [Privacy](https://www.gov.uk/help/privacy-notice)
  * [Cookies](https://www.gov.uk/help/cookies)
  * [Accessibility statement](https://www.gov.uk/help/accessibility-statement)
  * [Contact](https://www.gov.uk/contact)
  * [Terms and conditions](https://www.gov.uk/help/terms-conditions)
  * [Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg](https://www.gov.uk/cymraeg)
  * [Government Digital Service](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/government-digital-service)

All content is available under the [Open Government Licence
v3.0](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3/), except where otherwise stated

[© Crown copyright](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-
management/re-using-public-sector-information/uk-government-licensing-
framework/crown-copyright/)

